All I know about the war
is that the Germans invaded Luxembourg.
For 4 years
Luxembourg was occupied by the Nazis.
The war has ended long ago,
but there is still a lot of talk about all
that happened then.
Most people here
were against the Nazis.
But there were those,
that were on their side.
Nobody has ever explained
it all to me.
My father always says,
I'm too young for that.
When the Americans liberated us,
and forced the Nazis back,
the difficult years were behind us.
I was born 6 years after the war.
Now I'm 12 years old.
Norbi!
Time just has to stand still.
But it never does.
The clock is always on Dad's side.
- I know, I'm late.
- Go and wash your hands
Just a minute...
50 secs. To gulp down
a soup is a world record.
You keep out of it.
Come now!
Pretend it's cream of sorrel soup.
There's dirt in the soup!
Your mother doesn't cook dirt.
Alright then. Come...
Dad! Don't!
So.
Today he laid it on really hard...
He just wants, the plate emptied.
Next time I'll eat your soup.
- What's that red mark on your neck?
- You've been spying
- Show me!
- No it's nothing to do with you.
What's that?
A love bite
You get that when you kiss.
- Has Dad seen it?
- If you tell on me, I'm warning you...
You're in your nightdress already?
Just look at that!
- It wasn't me
- Who was it, then?
How am going to get that clean?
Save away the whole day as it is.
Have you any idea what it cost?
The wops attacked us.
Watch your language?
And did they do it in your bed?
Had to change your bed again
this morning.
Can't help it!
Norbi!
It must work if I concentrate
on my bladder.
Bladder, are you listening to me?
No puddles tonight. Agreed?
Shit.
Pick that up.
Norbi!
Pick it up yourself.
Our title server is getting angry
Mecki's coming.
Good morning teacher
Sit.
That's what you call invigilating?
Date.
Zantin!
26th of March 1962, Sir
Added together?
2 and 6 is eight...
and 3 is 11...
and 1 is...
12...
2 plus 9 is 11
Sit.
Times 12, divided by 6?
Scholtes!
100 lines: "I must listen when my classmates
are being asked a question!"
Welscheid!
11 times 12 is...
The result of the calculation is unimportant.
I'm sure Treines is out to get Backes.
22. Sir
22... Backes!
- Have you done your homework?
- Yes, Sir.
Always me.
Why am I always the scapegoat?
What do the other mothers say,
when they come home with torn pullovers?
- Do you like it?
- Yes.
How does it work?
There's no aerial.
- Hello, Auntie Zess.
- Hello. Norbi.
A parcel arrived,
from Aunt Jacqueline in America.
That's for you.
Have you seen what she sent me?
It's great.
I'm very excited.
It's fantastic.
Try it on.
I'll just go and hang up my jacket
Can you manage?
Can he wear that to church?
Well it is very smart.
Like in America.
Do you keep it?
It suits you.
- Where did you get the anorak?
- From America.
My aunt sent it to me
It was expensive, I'm sure.
Somebody's been killed!
- Stabbed 20 times in the heart!
- Where?
In Furnace Street
Let's go!
They found a corpse. Stabbed!
Everything was covered in blood.
What were you doing there?
We were just looking.
We saw how they carried the dead body out.
Don't want to hear anything about it.
Don't want you looking at things like that
- We...
- Give me the ruler.
Why is the candle here?
So that there will never be a war again.
Can I have one too?
Why do I only get such a small candle?
Do you believe that God is just
as satisfied with a small candle?
Think so...
What does REM mean?
It means remit.
That is when subtract something
from a customer
What do you subtract?
You just say it like that
The customer has to pay less...
and that's missing in the till at night.
Some customers
want a reduction on everything.
Even for a bar of soap.
Oh, Mr Weldscheid...
Can you give me a reduction?
What does the "P" mean?
Nothing.
Sister Bernadette.
Sister Mara, good morning to you!
We would like a typewriter
Here we have...
the SM-20. our newest model,
a very practical machine
What's the difference
between the two models?
The difference lies mainly in the typeface.
We have
two typefaces:
Perl or Pica.
This is Pica. This is Perl.
These are the only two
that are exported overseas
Typewriters are like churches:
There is a limited choice
And just what do you mean?
My dear Sister,
one either goes to heaven or to hell.
What do they cost?
They both cost the same.
5,740 Francs.
With case. Of course!
That is
not exactly a gift.
Can give you a little reduction
Let's say 5.200.
Hope God will remember this later
We will have to think about it
Goodbye.
We'll never see those two again
- You want to bet?
- 20 Francs?
You're on!
When the alarm goes off,
get up and go to the toilet.
Then you'll be all right till the morning.
Good night.
Sleep well.
My father is hiding something.
I don't understand what it is.
Why "P"?
Maybe he keeps an account
of his sins.
After he dies
he has to show the book to God...
and then he decides if it's heaven or hell.
Who knows the truth?
When boys stroke their penis,
and excite their body...
to ejaculation,
this is called the sin...
of masturbation or impurity
This can do them harm.
In the long term
these boys grow weak and exhausted
Red patches...
may appear all over the body.
Norbi!
Wake up!
The priest called.
Someone's dying
Are you awake?
I hope it takes a long time today.
Then I can skip maths.
You're here at last!
You need be afraid no longer.
I am here with you
He doesn't understand Luxembourgian.
During the night he went...
I woke up.
A horrible noise...
Mucus came out of his mouth.
I called for you immediately.
I hope this woman
gets out her purse soon.
I never know if the people
are going to give me a tip.
She looks a bit mean to me.
Amen
This is for you. Goodbye.
Goodbye.
Good morning, Sir.
Sit.
Give me that.
You could learn something new,
if you read it...
...maybe for a stupid dictation.
The first one to talk, is out that door!
You can't cheat in the entrance exam.
And you just wait
till you're in grammar school!
You're too stupid even for a building site
Open your books.
Now Trelnes is in his element.
He's remembering the times,
when he was still "Little Mecki".
Ambush?
What kind of rubbish is that?
Damn it.
Out... On the double!
And close the door from the other side!
And...
you can forget the entrance exam too.
If my father knew
what I spent my money on.
Doesn't matter,
This is how to make yourself popular:
First you're beaten half to death,
and then pleaded with,
because you earn money
as a ministrant.
Where have you been?
- Your teacher was here.
- You read trashy comics!
Don't we have enough books here?
Don't read trashy comics
And this?
What is that?
Don't you know what you're doing?
Don't you know what that means?
Read!
Aren't you able to read
a text without pictures anymore?
Trash...
like the comic books "Tarzan", "Sigurd"
or 'Akim", encourage the power of evil.
Children become absent-minded,
suffering from neuroses and sleeplessness.
Just as excessive masturbation.
Is accompanied by over-excitement
of the senses and insomnia.
One might add "bed wetting'.
Come with me!
Do it!
Set it on fire!
It doesn't belong to me.
Shall I get the whip?
My dear son
never expected that from you.
Come,
help me.
Look...
You can choose a few little bunnies
Good afternoon.
These are the new tenants.
What's their name?
Pinato.
They're Italians
Here's the key.
Thank you.
Goodbye.
With a 'P'?
Of course!
Do you know him?
He is the son of the widow who lives
in the Lorenzini's house.
His father was a Kraut supporter
in the war.
The boy can't do anything about that.
Don't want Norbi to deal with him.
Do you think that there will be another war?
Be careful.
Like with the Germans?
Can I try it?
Why do you want to hide your grey hair?
People don't have to
know everything about you
is a Bolshevist
something like an Algonquin?
Yes.
What is an Algonquin?
Hello, Eugène.
Hello, Zess.
What on earth happened to you?
What do you mean?
Were you attacked?
Aren't you too hot in that thing?
That "thing' is an anorak.
Are you going to eat with us. Zess?
Not if it's French toast...
You're so picky.
Not all of us can afford steak
A good businessman like you?
You can't fool me.
If you eat too much steak
your hair stands on end.
And real butter...
there's none of that either?
Fine. I'm going now.
I've still got some fruit salad at home.
That's good for your complex on.
I like weddings best of all.
There's money to jingle in my pocket.
And my father is a different person.
Up in the gallery he's in 7th heaven.
Now I know, he's hiding something from me.
What can be behind this "P"?
Go over that side.
Come let's try it...
So: 1,2...
start with the right...
No, on 3.
- Don't you want to anymore?
- No
You can't see anything... the sun...
What are you doing here?
Are you completely crazy?
- Where is your mother?
- At a meeting of 'Wives and Mothers"
Who allowed you to come here?
Paulette has often been here.
- We didn't do anything.
- Didn't do anything?
What does that mean?
That's what you call: "nothing"?
If I tell your father,
he'll show you what "nothing" means!
- Who does the radio belong to?
- Auntie Jacqueline gave it to me.
You were there!
- And what's this?
- It's Paulette's.
Give me that trash
- That's my magazine!
- You are going home right now!
- And in my house too.
- So what?
Do you think your house is different
just because you're a cleric?
I don't want to see you here ever again.
Maybe Dad looks at this secretly.
Or Treines.
I bet they'd stutter at confession then.
The nuns bought a typewriter!
Pica
Good!
And my 20 francs?
What 20 francs?
Our bet!
What bet?
That bet.
There. My son
May I leave the table?
Good afternoon.
Mr Meyer
Why didn't you tell me
that Mr Meyer was here?
Excuse me,
my son is a little shy
Norbi. Mr. Meyer...
is here to help you
with your incontinence problem.
As I said, he still does it in the bed.
Let's go to his room... let's see...
- Alright?
- Alright, let's go.
It's coming from here.
See that?
Look!
Look at it.
It's water.
What water?
Mr Welscheid.
There's water flowing under the house.
It could also be...
a branch of the river Alzette.
The Alzette comes from there.
And flows that way.
His penis...
is directed down river.
That's why you urinate, my boy
You know what, little man?
We'll move the furniture around this evening.
Just look at them.
A billion heathen children...
So children...
If you want
that the little heathens are baptised,
you have to give me 10 francs.
And whoever gives me 10 francs,
will get one of these pictures.
Here.
You can choose one.
Anyone else?
Norbi?
What do you think?
Why should I buy a little heathen?
I need my money for other things.
Don't have any money with me. Chaplain.
Children...
Remember my words
Every time a little heathen dies,
without being baptised,
they go to Purgatory.
Can you imagine that?
Purgatory
Children...
Our dear Lord...
did not create all of us equal.
But as soon as they are baptised.
They are all equal in his eyes:
Black or white, big or small.
But of those that are baptised
some go to heaven and others to hell.
So children,
who can give me an example...
of differences between people?
Stan and Laurel!
The Russians and the Americans!
What's the difference?
The Russians are nasty. The Americans are nice!
Who says that?
My father!
Next week we'll carry on from there
Goodbye, Sir.
Good afternoon, Sir.
Just wait till you get home!
This s pure smut!
Sit down.
If we wish someone ill,
we meet at this grave.
Mecki is an asshole.
Drop dead, Mecki.
Go on, Guy.
We write his name on the gravestone.
It's like a curse.
And then we concentrate.
The devil take you.
And then he can teach cheeky...
little devils in hell.
He was dust,
and to dust he will return.
You first.
You're turn.
One of you stole something.
The question is: Who?
if you tell me who it was,
I'll leave you alone.
And?
Who was it?
Me. Now we can go...
You?
Since when do little Jesus children steal?
You're not capable of stealing
Listen here,
I'm going to search just one of you.
Wonder if I can guess the right one.
Bad luck.
Here Half for you and half for me
I've got tickets for the cinema
Do you want to come with me?
Hello.
Who are those wops?
That's Pinato, my father rents to him
Don't you think he looks like a gangster?
Gangster?
He works at the blast furnace.
Well, he looks like the murderer
from Furnace Street.
Look
He has the same moustache.
Let's go, otherwise we'll miss the film
Exactly the same moustache,
slim.
Maybe the "P"
in Dad's notebook means "Pinato"?
The police are looking
for the suspected murderer.
Witnesses are requested,
to contact the Esch on the Alzette police.
Maybe Dad also has his suspicions,
but why doesn't he go to the police then?
Make a note
The suspect left the house at 13.34
1334?
We're going to be late for school
We'll get him and then be on television.
We don't even know if it really was him.
Of course it was.
You saw the sketch.
And then "P", for Pinato.
Even your father knows it was him.
Let's go.
Children of Esch. Please pay attention...
The business association of the town of Esch
is holding a writing competition for children.
This is the final announcement.
There is still time to take part.
The story should be no longer than 3 pages.
Send it, by March 31st...
to the Esch Business Association.
Here is Radio Luxembourg, VHF 92,5...
channel 18.
We have to spy on him.
Then we'll tell the police everything.
Then we' get a medal.
That's my sister!
Josette!
Watch out! Father's coming!
Quick!
That was close.
If you say anything to father,
I'll kill you!
- He would have caught you without me.
- I'm fed up with him spying on me.
- Spying?
- Don't pretend to be stupid.
Do you think it's just a coincidence
he went cycling on the hill this afternoon?
- This afternoon?
- Yes.
Stop repeating everything.
He creeps around all the time,
when he thinks I'm with Gust.
What were you doing there anyway?
- He's called Gust?
- I've just said that.
He lives just across
from the murder victim
Did he see anything?
Is he called Gust Pfeiffer?
No, Tendler.
- Pendler?
- Tendler!
What does father do,
when he's spying on you?
He makes a fool of himself, that's all.
But this afternoon it was very close
- Is that why you never speak to father?
- If you were a girl you'd understand it.
You don't know what's going on.
And you're on his side too
I'm not allowed to do anything.
I'm not allowed to go anywhere.
Have to do everything in secret.
Shut up!
Swear.
You better.
Who's that?
- You don't know it?
- No.
That's the Sharks.
A group from Luxembourg.
Do you know them?
That's the Beatles. They're great!
And off to the barber.
Norbi...
You're 12 years old now.
It's time we told you.
Your willy...
you've certainly noticed.
That it gets harder sometimes.
Do you know why it gets harder?
It gets stiff.
That's what happens to boys
They get a hard-on...
Listen to your mother.
To conceive a child,
Dad and Mum have to love each other a lot.
Then Dad's willy gets stiff...
and then...
Irène,
That's enough
Am I saying something wrong?
- We'll talk about it after mass.
- Do you want to carry on?
So,
when Dad and Mum...
Love each other,
hug each other tight,
and then Dad put his willy...
in the woman's vagina.
And then...
when they really love each other,
then...
sperm comes out of the penis,
sperm from the testicles
You're just confusing the boy.
But everything I say is right.
Just let me do it.
Millions of little sperms...
and when one of these little sperms
meets an egg cell... just imagine...
Just one little sperm is enough...
to make a child!
My father is saved at last.
And off to the confessional.
Get up now
Go. Jängi.
Germany! Germany!
Don't you know them?
- They live in Canal Street.
- I've seen the boy.
Mrs. Schaul told me her husband died in '46.
Nobody mourned him, during the war
he was a Nazi, you can say it out loud.
Yes, but the poor woman.
Go Luxembourg!
Germany! Germany!
Shut up, you with your Krauts!
Wop!
Bloody Germans! Bloody Krauts!
Ebert is head and shoulder above them all!
- That's what the Nazis thought too!
- Who's a Nazi here?
Bloody yellow shirt!
Collaborator!
Separate!
Watch where you are putting your feet!
Good afternoon, Mr Welscheid
Be careful!
Hello Norbert.
Oh. No.
The 'P' is missing.
You wouldn't believe how expensive it was
What has happened?
Don't know.
Just noticed it
Well bless me.
Come in
Irène
Come and sweep up.
Is this a warning from "P"?
People here don't buy anything expensive.
Yes, but this model is very good value.
How are you, Norbert?
Do you like it?
Norbi!
Before I forget,
have a few new machines in the car.
I'll go and get one. Just a minute.
Is his name Paschulke?
Heinz Paschulke.
A real German name
Why does he always call me Norbert?
He does it on purpose.
During the war they would have called
you Norbert
The Germans. Norbert!
Why do you allways say "the Germans"?
Because they are Germans, my boy!
They called me "Eugen'.
And your mother "Irene'.
Why?
They wanted everyone to speak German
Can I come in?
During the war everybody sat in the cellar too
and secretly listened to the radio
If the Gestapo found them out.
They were taken away.
Don't you want to join the army?
Are you a German? Yes or no?
No! One finger less!
No! Another finger gone!
Stop it! What do you think you're doing?
In half an hour we'll be at the border!
Then guide will come.
Which guide?
- One who knows the way.
- Which way?
The way to escape. Over the border
- We are conscientious objectors.
- What?
We're in the resistance!
We're not yellow shirts.
Yellow shirts?
You should have thought about that earlier.
Let me out!
You stay here.
Otherwise they'll get you.
Traitor!
Yellow shirt!
As soon as he's gone,
the Gestapo will come.
Shit!
Have to get back to the shop.
Or else Fatty Wegener
will deduct an hour off my pay
Well, Mrs. Lamesch,
Would you like a whole one or a half?
- Give me a whole one.
- A whole one, with pleasure.
They're you are, Mrs. Lamesch.
Hello Aloyse
There
There. Take it
Goodbye, young man.
So, boys.
- What's your name?
- Aloyse.
Surname?
Do you know him?
Do you know him, yes or no?
What's this?
Why did you do that?
Go home and tell your mother to come here!
She's dead!
Then send your father.
My father says if I want a car,
I should steal it.
Get out of here, you cheeky monkey.
And don't ever come back.
Really must to talk to your teacher
Isn't he in your class?
Only know that he's called Aloyse.
Tell him to give you some
When was the last time
you were in the cemetery?
I should have taken the car.
Aloyse was my friend after all...
and now I've spoilled everything.
Now I'm cursed.
It's my father's fault.
And? How is our little ministrant?
What's this about?
Haven't done anything.
Leave me alone!
What are you doing? Let me go!
Calm down, calm down. Thank you
His hand got caught in the circular saw.
Furnace Street murderer arrested.
Eugène. He's not to blame.
He has to take care of his things.
And go to the barber.
Nonsense.
The "P" of Pinato?
That was a false trail.
If he doesn't come into the equation
anymore, what can the "P" mean?
"P" for Penis.
"P" for Priest.
Pension. Panama.
Palace
Parrot. Policeman
Pirate
Pimple
Pilot Palm tree.
Preacher! Pudding!
Prostate
Puree. Political.
My father always writes
a capital ' P' in his notebook!
You think it has something
to do with the Nazis?
Your father is looking
for Nazi politicals?
Do you know one?
Kiss my arse!
Why does Fred act so strange
when he hears "Nazi"?
Write!
What?
What should I write?
What is a yellow shirt?
A Nazi collaborator
Your father will understand it.
But I don't.
Write your own rubbish
Do you know why we've moved so often?
They say that my father was one.
My mother can't stand hearing it anymore.
A what?
A Luxembourger Nazi!
A collaborator!
People like your father,
always point a finger at us.
They never stop.
He should find out for himself how that is.
Good morning. What's the matter?
What's this?
This can't be true
Irène!
Come down! Just look at this
Is it supposed to be a joke?
Come inside.
They should be prosecuted, it's a scandal!
- You're right!
- You can't do anything!
We won't move away just because of this
piece of scandalous behaviour!
Come here, my boy
Somebody wants to drag
our names in the dirt.
You don't have to be afraid.
You don't have to be afraid,
we're here.
I'll show them,
what kind of yellow shirt I am
What kind of German...
Me, a Nazi!
My dear boys,
if you continue like this,
none of you will pass the entrance exam
Not one of you!
You needn't look at me like that.
Then you'll stand their like idiots.
Don't care.
Don't have to go to grammar school
Don't come crying to me later on,
when you're too stupid,
to do your homework...
and too stupid to earn
Terrible!
Do you understand?
Yes, Sir.
Guy, sit up straight.
Take out your arithmetic books.
Looking for someone?
Is Fred here?
He doesn't work here any more.
You should have come yesterday.
Where is he?
He just said he was moving away.
Do they all think my father
was an collaborator now?
And if It was true?
Excuse me.
Isnt my aunt here?
She'll be here in a minute,
she went shopping.
Are you Norbi?
I've seen my sister's too...
And?
You're beautiful...
Are you the new saleswoman?
Do you know what a "yellow shirt" is?
They are Luxembourgers,
who worked for the Nazis
And what happened to them?
After the war they were condemned.
And why were they called "yellow shirts".
Think because they had yellow uniforms.
Think my father was a "yellow shirt" too.
Hello, Norbi!
What's the matter with you?
He thinks his father was a "yellow shirt".
Don't be silly!
He would have eaten them alive!
Maybe even did. The old meanie!
I think it's fine.
To keep an eye on Josette but...
you exaggerate.
- What do you mean?
- You supervise her too much
- Stop it.
- She can't stand you anymore.
She'll just have to stand it.
She'll be grateful to me later.
She is 16 and still too young...
I have to know when she ovulates and when
she has her period, and what she does...
At 16 she is still immature.
She hangs around with that character.
That's ridiculous
She needs help.
She's too young for all that
I know now,
what a woman's period is.
- Are you a woman?
- What?
That's nothing to do with you
You're going to be just like father
What does it have to do with father?
He makes a note, of when have my period.
To find out. If I'm pregnant.
All this spying makes me sick
I'm an idiot. Idiot. Idiot.
The "P" stands for Period,
not for Political
I've been made to look an Idiot by all of them.
By father, Josette, Fred;
they and their bloody secrets!
Not too short
And what does your father say?
Nothing.
What did that cost?
35 Francs, as always.
As always...
He didn't cut anything off.
Go on, back to the barber right now!
Good afternoon, Mr Meyer
Say 'Hello".
I'm happy, you came.
This morning the police were here.
I'm sure they will be able to help us.
It's a very dreadful thing.
I thought...
perhaps you could find...
maybe you could find the culprit.
It was someone from here.
Is that what your pendulum says?
From Esch?
From this area?
But I know all the people here.
No-one would do something so nasty
It was somebody from this house.
Mr Meyer,
only my family lives in this house.
The pendulum is never wrong,
Mr Welscheid
You know that very well.
Excuse me.
It was me.
What was you?
The writing outside I did it.
Mr Welscheid.
I'll leave you alone with your son.
You have to...
sort it out with him.
You?
How could you get such an idea?
You talk about the Germans.
All the time. The bloody Krauts...
You call them names all the time.
I'm not allowed to go around with Fred,
because his father was a yellow shirt!
He can't help it.
You don't know how it is,
when everyone points a finger at you.
Now you know. It was about time
Who put all that into your head?
It certainly wasn't you.
And I'm not going back to the barber.
If I tell the others,
what they've missed here.
"All hell has broken loose",
my father would say.
Luckily these girls don't have fathers
who spy after them.
Won't you tell us,
what your story is about?
Listen now to the story from Norbi Welscheid,
who won the first prize.
I'm the son of a businessman.
I place a stool and a table
In our shop window.
I put a typewriter on the table,
and sit down on the stool to write.
But no-one is supposed to notice
that I'm a real person.
I'm a robot, an advertising machine.
I type on the keys,
with imperceptible movements.
I have to sit up straight,
I mustn't move my head.
I mustn't smile or make a face,
or twitch my nose.
My father stands inside the shop
and smiles.
He is satisfied, because the robot
is a good advert for his business.
When I can't stand It any more
on the stool because I have an itch,
my father draws the curtain.
Then I have time to scratch myself
or go to the toilet.
The robot will become an attraction.
People will talk about it...
and jostle one another to look at me.
It was so easy.
I just said "no" once and a fresh breeze
blew through the house.
Someone had to stand up to him.
And then the competition
something like that works wonders.
No-one thought I could do it.
I wonder if Fred heard the radio?
I have to find out where he moved to,
even if he did make fun of me...
him with his stupid yellow shirts.
Tomorrow Is the last day of school.
Two months without school!
I won't miss it.
You only become wiser
from real life anyway.
We' go and buy something
for mum's birthday!
We wouldn't have believed you could do it.
What are you talking about?
About the shop window.
How do you know about that?
My mother cleans the police offices.
She hears things
How come?
Thought your mother was dead.
Did you really do it alone?
Do you think I always need help?
I've convinced Aloyse...
to leave a little souvenir for our teacher
on the wall of his house.
So that he doesn't forget us
over the holidays.
Quick! We're in a hurry!